yo yo what's going on joshua devon
tyrell in raw form and welcome to
another help me devon raw tutorial and
today in this help me davon tutorial
i'll be showing you guys how to fix
harshness in your vocal recordings i'm
going to assume if you're stumped if you
stumbled upon this video that you have
harshness in your vocals or some type of
sound source and you're trying to figure
out how to fix that so let's get right
to it
so right here i have a vocal and um it's
it's harsh there's a certain harshness
to it the only thing that's on this
vocal right now is just a little bit of
compression
and that is it so this is a vocal
recording that's straight out the gate
listen to what this vocal sounds like
let's understand and feel what this
vocal feels like you know you gotta pass
we standing up in blasts girl let go
your feelings if you're feeling me treat
me like they may god yeah i ain't doing
[__] to you cause i've been your friend
never pretend treat you like the mother
[__] in your bad shawty okay so you
can hear that this vocal is harsh there
is some harshness to this vulcan i'm
going to assume that you have run into
this issue as well more or less as far
as the range of how much harshness is on
yours i noticed that i get more
harshness when i um hit
bigger or louder notes i notice that
that resonance it starts to really hurt
my ear how do we fix this how do we
approach this how do we identify where
the problem is how do we do this
so before we go any further i'm going to
ask you guys to comment like and
subscribe to keep this channel going
also i'm going to ask you guys to go on
over to helpmedivan.info at any time
during this tutorial to get some of our
goodies uh presets vocal chains uh for a
bunch of different daws to support the
channel let's get back to the tutorial
okay so there's two ways that you can
approach this uh one is eq and another
is de-essing i'm going to show you the
eq way first i'm going to show you the
de-esser weight next then i'm going to
show you a combination of the eq and
de-esser and how powerful that can be to
get rid of your harshness and then i'll
also show you a little special trick for
uh to make it even easier uh
you'll see when i got you
all right cool
so now let's go on over to our eq so the
first technique we're gonna do to try to
get rid of this harshness is the eq
so let's look at this again let's look
at this vocal within the premise of our
actual uh fat filter pro q eq you know
you gotta pass we standing up in blast
girl let go your feelings if you're
feeling me treat me like they may god
yeah okay cool so i hear that hardness
harshness i feel it and i'm trying to
figure out to myself where does it
reside so
the way i usually like to do it is
typically when i hear uh my ear is very
accustomed to hearing harshness in the
sense of knowing where it is i can feel
like the harshness is coming from that
like three kilohertz range uh in a sense
and that's where i feel like the
resonance is coming from that's one
place that i can identify so of course i
don't know exactly where it is within
that three kilohertz range but if you
train your ear hard enough you can kind
of identify problem areas so this is
what i want you to do i want you to
start to train yourself with problem
areas with my training and hearing it
myself i could tell that 3k range i have
a problem and that's a lot of times
where harshness will reside in your
vocal depending on your microphone in
source
okay cool so how do i find it first
thing i'm going to do is i'm going to
open up an eq at the 3 kilohertz range
i'm going to do something a little taboo
a lot of people are not big fans of
sweeping well when it comes to me
i am a fan of sweeping i'm a fan of
sweeping when i know i'm looking for a
space in within a certain spectrum
the problem is i don't like when people
turn up the eq start to sweep for the
problem not even identifying well what
am i looking for as opposed to you're
throwing it up and you're just like oh
that sounds bad not oh that sounds bad
i'm actually identifying hey i hear
frequency that i feel like has too much
resonance i'm gonna go within that spot
where i feel like it is find it in notch
that's how i like to go about my
sweeping when i'm looking for this type
of stuff
all right
so let's sweep let's start from down
here i know it's in that 1k to 4k range
where some of that harshness is reside
i'm going to crank it let's start down
here you know you gotta pass always
ending up in blast you do you feel it's
starting to hurt that's how i know oh
i'm getting close i feel like i'm in
that range you know you gotta pass
always
and we found it and boy does that hurt
this is what i call the pain frequency
luckily for us it happens to be right at
the 3 000 hertz range so what am i going
to do i'm going to take this and i'm
going to notch this out let's notch this
out you know you got to pass are we
standing up in blast girl let go your
feelings if you're feeling me jimmy let
me make it didn't that sound a lot more
lighter on your ear in that small little
moment of us notching that frequency out
just a lot of that you start to feel
like oh it feels a lot lighter on my ear
let's bypass it back and forth so you
can really hear what just happened
so check this out so without first i
know you gotta pass we standing up in
blasts girl let go of your feelings if
you're feeling me treat me like they may
god yeah i ain't doing [__] to you cause
i've been your friend never pretend
treat you like the mother [__] in your
bed it just feels like this tininess
this this hunkiness that exists in that
three kilohertz range we notch that
stuff out and it's a lot more easier uh
to listen to and so your listener can
probably endure listening to that sound
a lot longer as opposed to
subconsciously they just kind of say
uh i'm tired of this song i don't like
the song because it hurts it's resonance
all right
i feel like i heard a little bit of a
boxiness tone as well in this so i'm
gonna find that and that is a form of
harshness as well there's a certain boxy
this that i don't like that i feel like
is resin has some resonance in the lower
end of the spectrum probably within that
like 600 hertz range to 300 hertz range
so i'm gonna find that resonance there
as well and bring that out as well so
let's check it out so that's how i do it
i identify my problem areas and then i
sweep to find the exact locations and
then i pull them out
so let's find it within this problem
area over here so i'm going to start at
the 300 hertz range let's make it real
tight on the queue you know you got to
pass we standing up and last girl let go
your feelings if you're feeling me treat
me like they made god yeah i ain't doing
[__] to you cause i've been your friend
never pretend shoot you like the mother
[__] in your face shawty so i feel it
at the 350 i feel the most boxiness at
this 350 range you know you gotta pass
always in and up and blast so i'm gonna
knock some of that out right now you
know you gotta pass we standing up in
blast girl let go your feelings if
you're feeling me treat me like that guy
yeah i do [__] too okay now let's bypass
this whole thing back and forth and
let's see what we got so without first i
know you gotta pass we standing up in
blast girl let go your feelings if
you're feeling me treat me like they
made god yeah i ain't doing [__] to you
cause i've been your friend never
pretend treat you like the mother [__]
in your bed
so it's a lot easier to listen to is it
absolutely perfect at this point
absolutely not but did we get rid of
some of that resonance that was
bothering us in that range absolutely
now granted i can go back on over to the
2k to 4k that kind of range and even
notch out some more because i still do
hear some of that harshness but i just
wanted to show you quickly hey this is
how you can kind of find that area until
it feels a lot more easier and lighter
on your ear
so that when you do start compressing
when you do start adding and boosting
eqs at least you know that you're not
building upon that resonance that is
hurting and that's causing pain in your
ear
okay
the other technique that i want to show
you guys is the uh de-esser route so
let's open up an rdsr i'll open up a
simple one that a lot of us may commonly
have
and what i'm going to do is i'm going to
open up one of my presets my three
kilohertz killer and basically what i'm
going to do is i'm going to go around to
that same frequency range that i found
that issue it was around that three
kilohertz spot i'm gonna take this and
then i'm gonna explain to you uh the
difference between using the uh the
de-esser and eq there's a big difference
and you have to be careful in which one
you choose to attack your problem i'll
explain to you in a second stay with me
okay so let's roll on over here to about
that
3 500 hertz range and let's use this um
de-esser to kind of attack that problem
that we're having let's put the uh
threshold way up here let's put the
range to about a
nine
negative nine and all this means is hey
anything that passes the threshold
on your de-esser i want you to knock it
down about nine at most nine db so
anything that crosses the threshold of
that specific frequency range that we
have specified now de-esser the range is
saying i will knock it down the most 9
db understood
okay
so depending on how i set this threshold
right here
will basically let the range know what
it should do and how much it should be
compressing this specific frequency
range here
okay cool so let's give it a try you
know you gotta pass we standing up in
blast girl let go your feelings if
you're feeling me treat me like that man
[Music]
do you see how it attacks
that moment that that harshness that
that thing that's kind of buzzing in the
air you don't even realize it's really
happening until it's gone you're like oh
that's so much easier to listen to check
it out again
without you know you gotta pass we
standing up in blasts girl let go your
feelings if you're feeling me treat me
like they may god yeah i ain't doing
[__] to you cause i've been your friend
never pretend treat you like the mother
[__]
granted we can sit here and say hey
that's a little bit too much that is
taken out take the range move it up a
little bit tell her hey the most i want
you to take out is 6 db find the spot
that makes sense for you but man does
that really grab that that frequency
range that's causing that pain and
pulling that thing down and really
making the vocal feel a little bit
tighter and a little bit more concise so
that when you add some compression later
you got a vocal that doesn't hurt my
ears that is really just cutting through
and just feels good overall um this is
extremely powerful to use and the
difference between using the eq and the
uh r the de-esser is that the de-esser
is a momentary takeaway of that
frequency range as opposed to the eq
being a permanent takeaway think about
it that eq sits you take out the
frequency it's gone whether it's not so
much of that um resonance there or if
there's a lot of that resonance there as
opposed to the de-esser if there is more
of that resonance uh at certain moments
then it will work harder to take that
stuff out and if there's not much of
that resonance there at that moment it
won't even try to actually pull that
frequency out meaning that that
frequency as far as that three kilohertz
will stay where it is it won't compress
it as opposed to if it feels like hey
that's a lot of it it moves it so you
kind of gotta choose and pick and choose
what you feel will work best for your
song a lot of times i'll be honest with
you i'll go for the de-esser from the
very beginning and then towards the end
if i feel like i still got a little bit
of resonance then i use the eq canada
clean things up a bit and kind of move
things out the way and that's what i use
so you can use this with each other eq
and de-esser or you can use them
separately for whatever problems that
you're facing with your vocal this is
really really important to understand
and to know because this is this can
make or break your song um as far as how
long people can deal with listening to
it and as far as when a master engineer
gets it and tries to boost things and
there's harshness everywhere
so as a bonus
i'll show you guys one more thing
and the last thing i'm going to show you
is something i didn't want to show you
guys off rip because i wanted you guys
to understand the concept of taking
frequencies away and de-essing but
there's an amazing plug-in from oak
sound called soothe 2.
and i'm a huge fan of this plug-in um
it's it's really good at getting rid of
resonance and there's so many different
applications that it can be used for
from guitars to vocals to uh just any
instrument or sound that you feel like
has resonance it does a really
powerful job of kind of masking and
getting rid of those frequencies but
still making the sound uh
sound like it uh its original sound
source and retaining it
so let's give this a try i'm gonna do
this as the default setting let's see
what it sounds like with the absolute
default setting you know you gotta
in pass girl let go your feelings if
you're feeling me treat me like they may
god yeah i ain't doing [__] to you cause
i've been your friend never pretend to
treat you like the mother
[__] so you can see right there uh
just from its natural setting um the
su-2 plug-in
just does a masterful job of just like
i'm gonna get rid of these frequencies
and hold these down it's really dope i
highly recommend the sutu plug-in um
maybe i'll leave a description for it in
the bottom um you can also go to my site
helpman.info uh for a bunch of presets
and things of that nature as well so
that was my tutorial on how to basically
fix harsh vocals in your vocal
recordings i'm glad you watched it make
sure you comment like subscribe make
sure you follow help me devon on the
instagram and also make sure that you go
or come on over
to help me devon dot info at any time to
get some of our presets vocal chains uh
and all kinds of goodies for a variety
of daws that i'm sure you have as well
also make sure you join our discord
community with a bunch of aspiring
engineers and musicians like yourself to
pick up some game and etc that is all in
the description below and make sure you
comment let me know what you guys want
to see next and until next time